README.md, before:

<a name="top-anchor"/>

| [Contents](#table-of-contents) | [SCXML Wiki](https://alexzhornyak.github.io/SCXML-tutorial/) | [SCXML Examples](https://alexzhornyak.github.io/SCXML-tutorial/Examples/) | [Forum](https://github.com/alexzhornyak/ScxmlEditor-Tutorial/discussions) |
|---|---|---|---|

**[Video overview - v.1.0](https://youtu.be/tL-NICRwggY)**

**[Video overview - v.2.0](https://youtu.be/SryLDwxcCjA)**

**[Video overview - v.2.1](https://youtu.be/h2CXPBAK_XY)**

# Scxml Editor 2.2
Powerful tool for creating, editing and debugging SCXML charts.

![MainExample](Images/Inheritance_TV_example.gif)

**New:** [IDE Insight](#new-ide-insight), [DOT-based autolayout](Doc/DotBasedAutoLayout.md#dot-based-auto-layout), [SCXML to DOT](Doc/DotBasedAutoLayout.md#how-to-convert-scxml-to-dot), [Inheritance](Doc/Inheritance.md), [visual chart splitting](Doc/VisualStateChartSplitting.md), [conditional project definitions](Doc/ConditionalDefines.md), GIF maker etc.
### Changelog
**2.2:** [Invoke ID is sending by testing apps](Doc/DebugScxmlStateCharts.md#how-to-debug-multiple-invoked-state-machines) <br/>
**2.1.10:** [New breakpoints interface](Doc/DebugScxmlStateCharts.md#breakpoints) <br/>
**2.1.9:** [Better handling of virtual states](Doc/VisualStateChartSplitting.md#adding-onentry-onexit-datamodel-and-invoke-to-virtual-states) <br/>
**2.1.8:** [Support of custom console testing applications](Doc/DebugScxmlStateCharts.md#custom-testing-application-setup) like [SCION command-line tool](https://gitlab.com/scion-scxml/cli) <br/>
**2.1.7:** [SVG Export Settings](Doc/ExportScxmlToSVG.md#svg-export-settings) <br/>
**2.1.6:** UScxmlTester with EcmaScript, In() predicate autocomplete, QtScxmlTester 5.9.1->5.15 <br/>
**2.1.5:** [Refactored Qt external debugger](Include/README.md) <br/>
**2.1.4:** [Export SCXML to SVG](Doc/ExportScxmlToSVG.md), [Structure View](Doc/ScxmlStructureView.md)

## System requirments
Windows 7, 8, 10
MSVC 2015 Update 3 Runtimes installed

## Installation
You can find portable version **[here](https://www.dropbox.com/sh/fjzm9ejdrtra1c0/AAB_ASgIPRFLX57x7rWPEv3Ta?dl=0)**

Latest version: **[2.2.0.1609](https://www.dropbox.com/sh/fjzm9ejdrtra1c0/AAB_ASgIPRFLX57x7rWPEv3Ta?dl=0)**

### First Install
1. [Download](https://www.dropbox.com/sh/fjzm9ejdrtra1c0/AAB_ASgIPRFLX57x7rWPEv3Ta?dl=0) and unpack it in any target location
2. Install **ScxmlEditor\vcredist_x86.exe** for **UscxmlTester**, **Graphviz**
3. Install  **ScxmlEditor\vcredist_x64.exe** for **QtScxmlTester** <br/>
(_You may skip steps 2 and 3 if you have previously installed MSVC 2015 Update 3_)

### Update
1. [Download](https://www.dropbox.com/sh/fjzm9ejdrtra1c0/AAB_ASgIPRFLX57x7rWPEv3Ta?dl=0) and unpack it into **Temporary** folder
2. Run **Temporary\ScxmlEditor\ScxmlEditor_InstallOrUpdate.cmd "Path\To\Location\ScxmlEditor"**

> NOTICE! We are continiously making updates, so follow the version number on the README page and update to the latest to have all last cool features

![AppPreview](Images/ApplicationPreview.png)

## Table of contents
[1. Inheritance](Doc/Inheritance.md)

[2. Conditional Project Definitions](Doc/ConditionalDefines.md)

[3. Smart Switch Transitions](Doc/SmartSwitchTransitions.md)

[4. Building a Project](Doc/ProjectBuild.md)

[5. Visual State Chart Splitting](Doc/VisualStateChartSplitting.md)

[6. DOT-based autolayout](Doc/DotBasedAutoLayout.md#dot-based-auto-layout)

[7. Convert SCXML to DOT](Doc/DotBasedAutoLayout.md#how-to-convert-scxml-to-dot)

[8. SCXML source code view and live editing](Doc/LiveScxmlEdit.md)

[9. Export SCXML to SVG](Doc/ExportScxmlToSVG.md)

[10. SCXML Structure View](Doc/ScxmlStructureView.md)

[11. External monitor for Qt applications](Include/README.md)

[12. How to debug SCXML statecharts](Doc/DebugScxmlStateCharts.md)

## Creating SCXML charts

### Creating a unit
**Unit** is a single scxml chart. It is mostly used for simple charts without invokable sessions.

Select **File**->**New Unit** or press **Shift+Ctrl+N**

![new_unit](Images/Tutorial_NewUnit.gif)

### Creating a project
**Project** is the most preferred choice of designing scxml charts to get all benefits (custom triggers, nested scxml charts, etc.)

Select **File**->**New Project** or press **Ctrl+N**

![new_project](Images/Tutorial_NewProject.gif)

## Editing SCXML charts
**ScxmlEditor** provides a project wizard for opening scxml. It supports either opening files with metainformation about the position of states and transitions or plain scxml files. You can use **ScxmlEditor** to add states and transitions to the chart. You can add executable content to a state chart to enable the state machine to modify its data model and to interact with external entities.

1. Select **File**->**Open Unit** or press **Shift+Ctrl+O** (for all types of .scxml files)
2. Select **File**->**Open Project** or press **Ctrl+O** (for ScxmlEditor .sproj files)

### Property inspector
Is used to edit and examine the properties of the currently selected states, executable contents and transitions.

![2018-09-26 09 50 33](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/18611095/46062582-eeb3e680-c172-11e8-993b-cedbc270894d.png)

### Editor tabs
Are used to add scxml elements, zoom, align, change chart visual options, etc.

![2018-09-26 09 50 33](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/18611095/46062784-8c0f1a80-c173-11e8-8fca-8937b9b0b721.png)

### NEW! IDE Insight
Press **'Ctrl+.'** to call **IDE Insight dialog** where you may search for all actions through the application. Add shapes, edit properties in one place!

![ide_insight](Images/IDE_Insight_Demo.gif)

### Structure View with quick search
![StructureViewSearch](Images/StructureView_Search.png)

## [Debugging](Doc/DebugScxmlStateCharts.md)
**ScxmlEditor** has an ability to receive and send string UDP commands: <br/>
### Receive API:
- `@@@` - clear highlighted states in all statecharts
- `@@@ScxmlName` - clear highlighted states in statechart where [\<scxml\>](https://alexzhornyak.github.io/SCXML-tutorial/Doc/scxml.html) 'name' is equal `ScxmlName` 
- `Type@ScxmlName@Msg@Id` - commands to highlight state or display message in **CallStack** panel <br/>
**Description:**
  `Type` - integer type of command: `1 - AfterEnter, 2 - BeforeEnter, 3 - AfterExit, 4 - BeforeExit, 5 - Step, 6 - BeforeExecContent, 7 - AfterExecContent, 8 - BeforeInvoke, 9 - AfterInvoke, 10 - BeforeUnInvoke, 11 - AfterUnInvoke, 12 - BeforeTakingTransition, 13 - AfterTakingTransition, 14 - StableConfiguration, 15 - BeforeProcessingEvent` <br/>
  `ScxmlName` - name of [\<scxml\>](https://alexzhornyak.github.io/SCXML-tutorial/Doc/scxml.html) <br/>
  `Msg` - message which depends on type of command. For example: for **BeforeEnter** or **BeforeExit** - it is the id(name) of states, for **BeforeInvoke** or **BeforeUnInvoke** it is the name of invoked element, etc. </br>
  `Id` - [identifier of the invoked](https://alexzhornyak.github.io/SCXML-tutorial/Doc/invoke.html#id) state machine (Since ScxmlEditor 2.2). Can be empty for root machines
> **BeforeEnter** graphically highlight and **BeforeExit** unhighlight the corresponding states, other commands are displayed in **CallStack** panel
#### Example of commands:
- `2@CalculatorStateMachine@operand1` - highlight state `operand1` in statechart **CalculatorStateMachine** <br/>
- `4@CalculatorStateMachine@operand1` - unhighlight state `operand1` in statechart **CalculatorStateMachine** <br/>
- `2@ScxmlSub1@isSub1@ID_SUB_1` - highlight state `isSub1` in statechart **ScxmlSub1** when [invoke Id](Doc/DebugScxmlStateCharts.md#how-to-debug-multiple-invoked-state-machines) is `ID_SUB_1` <br/>

You can also [trace the execution of the chart](Doc/DebugScxmlStateCharts.md#trace-mode) and use [breakpoints](Doc/DebugScxmlStateCharts.md#breakpoints).

### Local debugging
ScxmlEditor starts a testing application, intercepts its command line output and may communicate in two modes:
- [**UDP mode**](Doc/DebugScxmlStateCharts.md#receive-api) (receives UDP commands and sends events as UDP packages to testing application)
- [**Pipes mode (since version 2.1.8)**](Doc/DebugScxmlStateCharts.md#custom-testing-application-setup) (capture enter-exit events from console output by regexp, and submit trigger event to state machine to console input)

There are two ready-to-use testing applications:

1. Based on [USCXML framework](https://github.com/tklab-tud/uscxml).
Supports **null, lua, ecmascript** datamodels

2. Based on [Qt SCXML framework](https://doc.qt.io/qt-5/qtscxml-overview.html)
Supports **null, ecmascript** datamodels

Also you may write your own testing application using the corresponding API

### External debugging
In this mode ScxmlEditor only listens UDP commands for highlighting states and displaying messages in CallStack panel

### Breakpoints
![BreakpointsImage](Images/Breakpoints.gif)

#### [Qt SCXML framework debugging](Include/README.md)
For Qt SCXML applications you may include [scxmlexternmonitor2.h](Include/scxmlexternmonitor2.h) header to your project and follow [the instructions](Include/README.md)

#### Example of debugging Qt Calculator-QML project
![MonitorQML1](Images/ExternMonitor_QML1.png)

1. Select **Run**->**Start listening from external application**
2. Select **Run**->**Run**
3. Launch **Calculator-QML.exe**
4. Use **Pause** for tracing (optionally)

![CalculatorDebug](Images/CalculatorDebug.gif)

| [TOP](#top-anchor) | [Contents](#table-of-contents) | [SCXML Wiki](https://alexzhornyak.github.io/SCXML-tutorial/) | [SCXML Examples](https://alexzhornyak.github.io/SCXML-tutorial/Examples/) | [Forum](https://github.com/alexzhornyak/ScxmlEditor-Tutorial/discussions) |
|---|---|---|---|---|

Commit message:

Closes #62, Fixes #63. New: Qt SVG Monitors

README.md, after:

<a name="top-anchor"/>

| [Contents](#table-of-contents) | [SCXML Wiki](https://alexzhornyak.github.io/SCXML-tutorial/) | [SCXML Examples](https://alexzhornyak.github.io/SCXML-tutorial/Examples/) | [Forum](https://github.com/alexzhornyak/ScxmlEditor-Tutorial/discussions) |
|---|---|---|---|

**[Video overview - v.1.0](https://youtu.be/tL-NICRwggY)**

**[Video overview - v.2.0](https://youtu.be/SryLDwxcCjA)**

**[Video overview - v.2.1](https://youtu.be/h2CXPBAK_XY)**

# Scxml Editor 2.2
Powerful tool for creating, editing and debugging SCXML charts.

![MainExample](Images/Inheritance_TV_example.gif)

**New:** [IDE Insight](#new-ide-insight), [DOT-based autolayout](Doc/DotBasedAutoLayout.md#dot-based-auto-layout), [SCXML to DOT](Doc/DotBasedAutoLayout.md#how-to-convert-scxml-to-dot), [Inheritance](Doc/Inheritance.md), [visual chart splitting](Doc/VisualStateChartSplitting.md), [conditional project definitions](Doc/ConditionalDefines.md), GIF maker etc.
### Changelog
**2.2.1:** [Qt SVG Monitors Released](Include/README.md) <br/>
**2.2:** [Invoke ID is sending by testing apps](Doc/DebugScxmlStateCharts.md#how-to-debug-multiple-invoked-state-machines) <br/>
**2.1.10:** [New breakpoints interface](Doc/DebugScxmlStateCharts.md#breakpoints) <br/>
**2.1.9:** [Better handling of virtual states](Doc/VisualStateChartSplitting.md#adding-onentry-onexit-datamodel-and-invoke-to-virtual-states) <br/>
**2.1.8:** [Support of custom console testing applications](Doc/DebugScxmlStateCharts.md#custom-testing-application-setup) like [SCION command-line tool](https://gitlab.com/scion-scxml/cli) <br/>
**2.1.7:** [SVG Export Settings](Doc/ExportScxmlToSVG.md#svg-export-settings) <br/>
**2.1.6:** UScxmlTester with EcmaScript, In() predicate autocomplete, QtScxmlTester 5.9.1->5.15 <br/>
**2.1.5:** [Refactored Qt external debugger](Include/README.md#qt-scxml-external-debugging-monitor) <br/>
**2.1.4:** [Export SCXML to SVG](Doc/ExportScxmlToSVG.md), [Structure View](Doc/ScxmlStructureView.md)

## System requirments
Windows 7, 8, 10
MSVC 2015 Update 3 Runtimes installed

## Installation
You can find portable version **[here](https://www.dropbox.com/sh/fjzm9ejdrtra1c0/AAB_ASgIPRFLX57x7rWPEv3Ta?dl=0)**

Latest version: **[2.2.1.1614](https://www.dropbox.com/sh/fjzm9ejdrtra1c0/AAB_ASgIPRFLX57x7rWPEv3Ta?dl=0)**

### First Install
1. [Download](https://www.dropbox.com/sh/fjzm9ejdrtra1c0/AAB_ASgIPRFLX57x7rWPEv3Ta?dl=0) and unpack it in any target location
2. Install **ScxmlEditor\vcredist_x86.exe** for **UscxmlTester**, **Graphviz**
3. Install  **ScxmlEditor\vcredist_x64.exe** for **QtScxmlTester** <br/>
(_You may skip steps 2 and 3 if you have previously installed MSVC 2015 Update 3_)

### Update
1. [Download](https://www.dropbox.com/sh/fjzm9ejdrtra1c0/AAB_ASgIPRFLX57x7rWPEv3Ta?dl=0) and unpack it into **Temporary** folder
2. Run **Temporary\ScxmlEditor\ScxmlEditor_InstallOrUpdate.cmd "Path\To\Location\ScxmlEditor"**

> NOTICE! We are continiously making updates, so follow the version number on the README page and update to the latest to have all last cool features

![AppPreview](Images/ApplicationPreview.png)

## Table of contents
[1. Inheritance](Doc/Inheritance.md)

[2. Conditional Project Definitions](Doc/ConditionalDefines.md)

[3. Smart Switch Transitions](Doc/SmartSwitchTransitions.md)

[4. Building a Project](Doc/ProjectBuild.md)

[5. Visual State Chart Splitting](Doc/VisualStateChartSplitting.md)

[6. DOT-based autolayout](Doc/DotBasedAutoLayout.md#dot-based-auto-layout)

[7. Convert SCXML to DOT](Doc/DotBasedAutoLayout.md#how-to-convert-scxml-to-dot)

[8. SCXML source code view and live editing](Doc/LiveScxmlEdit.md)

[9. Export SCXML to SVG](Doc/ExportScxmlToSVG.md)

[10. SCXML Structure View](Doc/ScxmlStructureView.md)

[11. Qt SCXML Monitors](Include/README.md)

[12. How to debug SCXML statecharts](Doc/DebugScxmlStateCharts.md)

## Creating SCXML charts

### Creating a unit
**Unit** is a single scxml chart. It is mostly used for simple charts without invokable sessions.

Select **File**->**New Unit** or press **Shift+Ctrl+N**

![new_unit](Images/Tutorial_NewUnit.gif)

### Creating a project
**Project** is the most preferred choice of designing scxml charts to get all benefits (custom triggers, nested scxml charts, etc.)

Select **File**->**New Project** or press **Ctrl+N**

![new_project](Images/Tutorial_NewProject.gif)

## Editing SCXML charts
**ScxmlEditor** provides a project wizard for opening scxml. It supports either opening files with metainformation about the position of states and transitions or plain scxml files. You can use **ScxmlEditor** to add states and transitions to the chart. You can add executable content to a state chart to enable the state machine to modify its data model and to interact with external entities.

1. Select **File**->**Open Unit** or press **Shift+Ctrl+O** (for all types of .scxml files)
2. Select **File**->**Open Project** or press **Ctrl+O** (for ScxmlEditor .sproj files)

### Property inspector
Is used to edit and examine the properties of the currently selected states, executable contents and transitions.

![2018-09-26 09 50 33](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/18611095/46062582-eeb3e680-c172-11e8-993b-cedbc270894d.png)

### Editor tabs
Are used to add scxml elements, zoom, align, change chart visual options, etc.

![2018-09-26 09 50 33](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/18611095/46062784-8c0f1a80-c173-11e8-8fca-8937b9b0b721.png)

### NEW! IDE Insight
Press **'Ctrl+.'** to call **IDE Insight dialog** where you may search for all actions through the application. Add shapes, edit properties in one place!

![ide_insight](Images/IDE_Insight_Demo.gif)

### Structure View with quick search
![StructureViewSearch](Images/StructureView_Search.png)

## [Debugging](Doc/DebugScxmlStateCharts.md)
**ScxmlEditor** has an ability to receive and send string UDP commands: <br/>
### Receive API:
- `@@@` - clear highlighted states in all statecharts
- `@@@ScxmlName` - clear highlighted states in statechart where [\<scxml\>](https://alexzhornyak.github.io/SCXML-tutorial/Doc/scxml.html) 'name' is equal `ScxmlName` 
- `Type@ScxmlName@Msg@Id` - commands to highlight state or display message in **CallStack** panel <br/>
**Description:**
  `Type` - integer type of command: `1 - AfterEnter, 2 - BeforeEnter, 3 - AfterExit, 4 - BeforeExit, 5 - Step, 6 - BeforeExecContent, 7 - AfterExecContent, 8 - BeforeInvoke, 9 - AfterInvoke, 10 - BeforeUnInvoke, 11 - AfterUnInvoke, 12 - BeforeTakingTransition, 13 - AfterTakingTransition, 14 - StableConfiguration, 15 - BeforeProcessingEvent` <br/>
  `ScxmlName` - name of [\<scxml\>](https://alexzhornyak.github.io/SCXML-tutorial/Doc/scxml.html) <br/>
  `Msg` - message which depends on type of command. For example: for **BeforeEnter** or **BeforeExit** - it is the id(name) of states, for **BeforeInvoke** or **BeforeUnInvoke** it is the name of invoked element, etc. </br>
  `Id` - [identifier of the invoked](https://alexzhornyak.github.io/SCXML-tutorial/Doc/invoke.html#id) state machine (Since ScxmlEditor 2.2). Can be empty for root machines
> **BeforeEnter** graphically highlight and **BeforeExit** unhighlight the corresponding states, other commands are displayed in **CallStack** panel
#### Example of commands:
- `2@CalculatorStateMachine@operand1` - highlight state `operand1` in statechart **CalculatorStateMachine** <br/>
- `4@CalculatorStateMachine@operand1` - unhighlight state `operand1` in statechart **CalculatorStateMachine** <br/>
- `2@ScxmlSub1@isSub1@ID_SUB_1` - highlight state `isSub1` in statechart **ScxmlSub1** when [invoke Id](Doc/DebugScxmlStateCharts.md#how-to-debug-multiple-invoked-state-machines) is `ID_SUB_1` <br/>

You can also [trace the execution of the chart](Doc/DebugScxmlStateCharts.md#trace-mode) and use [breakpoints](Doc/DebugScxmlStateCharts.md#breakpoints).

### Local debugging
ScxmlEditor starts a testing application, intercepts its command line output and may communicate in two modes:
- [**UDP mode**](Doc/DebugScxmlStateCharts.md#receive-api) (receives UDP commands and sends events as UDP packages to testing application)
- [**Pipes mode (since version 2.1.8)**](Doc/DebugScxmlStateCharts.md#custom-testing-application-setup) (capture enter-exit events from console output by regexp, and submit trigger event to state machine to console input)

There are two ready-to-use testing applications:

1. Based on [USCXML framework](https://github.com/tklab-tud/uscxml).
Supports **null, lua, ecmascript** datamodels

2. Based on [Qt SCXML framework](https://doc.qt.io/qt-5/qtscxml-overview.html)
Supports **null, ecmascript** datamodels

Also you may write your own testing application using the corresponding API

### External debugging
In this mode ScxmlEditor only listens UDP commands for highlighting states and displaying messages in CallStack panel

### Breakpoints
![BreakpointsImage](Images/Breakpoints.gif)

## [Qt SCXML framework debugging](Include/README.md)

### NEW! [Qt SCXML Debug Via SVG](Include/README.md)
It was an old dream to monitor state machine workflow without any external dependencies it Qt and finally it comes true. </b>
We prepared some native SCXML SVG monitors:
- [scxmlsvgview.h](Include/scxmlsvgview.h) - for widgets (based on QGraphicsView)
    - see how to use it in [Dining Philosophers Example](https://github.com/alexzhornyak/SCXML-tutorial/tree/master/Examples/Qt/DiningPhilosophers)
- [scxmlsvgqmlitem.h](Include/scxmlsvgqmlitem.h) - for QML (based on QQuickPaintedItem)
    - see how to use it in [Stopwatch Example](https://github.com/alexzhornyak/SCXML-tutorial/tree/master/Examples/Qt/StopWatch)

![StopWatchDemo](Images/StopWatch_SvgMonitor.gif)

Since ScxmlEditor 2.2.1 you can export SCXML to SVG, include only monitor headers in your app and create monitor instances any time. 
> **NOTICE:** While state machine pointer is not set, the monitor **does nothing** and can be left in **Release**.

### Qt SCXML External Debugging with ScxmlEditor
For Qt SCXML applications you may include [scxmlexternmonitor2.h](Include/scxmlexternmonitor2.h) header to your project and follow [the instructions](Include/README.md)

#### Example of debugging Qt Calculator-QML project
![MonitorQML1](Images/ExternMonitor_QML1.png)

1. Select **Run**->**Start listening from external application**
2. Select **Run**->**Run**
3. Launch **Calculator-QML.exe**
4. Use **Pause** for tracing (optionally)

![CalculatorDebug](Images/CalculatorDebug.gif)

| [TOP](#top-anchor) | [Contents](#table-of-contents) | [SCXML Wiki](https://alexzhornyak.github.io/SCXML-tutorial/) | [SCXML Examples](https://alexzhornyak.github.io/SCXML-tutorial/Examples/) | [Forum](https://github.com/alexzhornyak/ScxmlEditor-Tutorial/discussions) |
|---|---|---|---|---|
